Note=From Ward Classen  - A Practical Guide to Software Licensing for Licensees and Licensors, Sixth Edition http://www.americanbar.org/publications1/books/softwarelicensing.html FORM E.5


Ti=<center>{Heading.sec}</center>

Doc.Ti=Statement of Work (SOW)


Heading.1.sec={Doc.Ti}

Heading.1.sec={Client.Name.Full}

Heading.2.sec={Vendor.Name.Full}

Heading.3.sec=Project Name

Heading.4.sec=Effective Date {EffectiveDate.YMD}

Heading.5.sec=Document Version: {DocVersion.sec}

Heading.=[Z/paras/s5]

DocVersion.sec=DRAFT 0


0.1.sec=<center>This Statement of Work is incorporated into the {MSA.Doc.Ti} dated {MSA.EffectiveDate.YMD}. </center>

0.2.sec=<br><br>

0.3.sec=Accepted By:<br><table><tr><td>{Client.US.Sign.Block}</td><td>{Vendor.US.Sign.Block}</td></tr></table>

0.=[Z/paras/s3]


Table of Contents

1.	Current Situation	
2.	Objectives	
	Client’s Business Objectives	
	Project Objectives	
	Phase Objectives	
	Constraint Prioritization	
3.	Scope	
	3.1	Business Process Scope	
	3.2	Organization Scope	
	3.3	Location Scope	
	3.4	Application Scope	
	3.5	Data Scope	
	3.6	Technology Scope	
4.	Approach	
	4.1	Approach Overview	
	4.2	Project Activities	
	4.3	Deliverables	
5.	Project Management	
	5.1	Management Approach	
		5.1.1	Agreed-Upon Baseline	
		5.1.2	Process to Monitor Progress	
		5.1.3	Means of Communication	
		5.1.4	Approach for Dealing with Issues	
		5.1.5	Change Control Procedure	
		5.1.6	Acceptance of Deliverables	
		5.1.7	Project Completion Criteria	
	5.2	Project Organization	
	5.3	Roles and Responsibilities	
6.	Assumptions	
	6.1	General Exclusions	
	6.2	General Assumptions	
	6.3	Business Process	
	6.4	Organization	
	6.5	Location	
	6.6	Application	
	6.7	Data	
	6.8	Technology	
7.	Fees and Expenses	
	7.1	Professional Fees	
	7.2	Travel-Related Expenses	
	7.3	Other Expenses	
	7.4	Payment Schedule	
8.	Appendices	


1.Ti=Current Situation

 
2.Ti=Objectives

2.1.Ti=Client’s Business Objectives

2.2.Ti=Project Objectives

2.3.Ti=Phase Objectives

2.4.Ti=Constraint Prioritization

2.4.0.sec=This phase of the project will be governed by the following prioritization of the three key constraints of scope, elapsed time, and budget:

2.4.1.Ti=High - 

2.4.2.Ti=Medium - x

2.4.3.Ti=Low - x

2.4.00.sec=This prioritization will drive the manner in which the project is managed, the way Changes of Scope will be handled, and the approach to resolving issues. These approaches are described in Section 5.1.

2.4.=[Z/ol/3]

2.=[Z/ol/4]
 
3.Ti=Scope

3.0.0.sec=The scope of this project can be defined most clearly by breaking it down into specific categories. Vendor describes these categories as domains. There are three domains related to business scope:

3.0.1.sec=Business Process Scope describes the work activities

3.0.2.sec=Organization Scope describes the people, teams, and departments

3.0.3.sec=Location Scope describes the physical locations or facilities

3.0.4.sec=There are three domains related to technical scope:

3.0.5.sec=Application Scope describes specific business software applications

3.0.6.sec=Data Scope describes the specific data items, structures, relationships, and business rules for information

3.0.7.sec=Technology Scope describes the hardware, system software, communication components, and development tools

3.0.00.sec=The following scope definitions, Sections 3.1–3.6, define the areas that are in and out of scope. Any areas not specifically identified as “in scope” are assumed to be “out of scope.” Specific items listed as “out of scope” are presented for clarity.

3.0.=[Z/ol/s7]

3.1.Ti=Business Process Scope

3.1.1.Ti=In Scope

3.1.2.Ti=Out of Scope

3.1.=[Z/ol/2]

3.2.Ti=Organization Scope

3.2.1.Ti=In Scope

3.2.2.Ti=Out of Scope

3.2.=[Z/ol/2]

3.3.Ti=Location Scope

3.3.1.Ti=In Scope

3.3.2.Ti=Out of Scope

3.3.=[Z/ol/2]

3.4.Ti=Application Scope

3.4.1.Ti=In Scope

3.4.2.Ti=Out of Scope

3.4.=[Z/ol/2]

3.5.Ti=Data Scope

3.5.1.Ti=In Scope

3.5.2.Ti=Out of Scope

3.5.=[Z/ol/2]

3.6.Ti=Technology Scope

3.6.1.Ti=In Scope

3.6.2.Ti=Out of Scope

3.6.=[Z/ol/2]

3.=[Z/ol/6]

4.Ti=Approach

4.1.Ti=Approach Overview

4.2.Ti=Project Activities

4.2.0.1.sec=Activity

4.2.0.2.sec=Description/Purpose

4.2.0.3.sec=Associated Work Product
	
4.2.0.4.sec=Responsibility

4.2.00.Sec=</i>

4.2.=[Z/tb/c/4]

4.2.=[Z/tb/r/1]

4.3.Ti=Deliverables

4.3.0.1.sec=Deliverable

4.3.0.2.sec=Description
	
4.3.0.3.sec=Responsibility

4.3.00.Sec=</i>

4.3.=[Z/tb/c/3]

4.3.=[Z/tb/r/1]

4.=[Z/ol/3]

5.Ti=Project Management

5.1.Ti=Management Approach

5.1.0.sec=Vendor and Client are jointly responsible for the management of the project and for providing the necessary resources to the project. Our joint management objectives are focused on tightly monitoring, controlling, and balancing the project’s three key constraints: Scope (or Product), Budget, and Schedule. To be effective in achieving this primary management objective, we must establish:

5.1.0.1.sec=An agreed-upon baseline,

5.1.0.2.sec=A process to monitor progress,

5.1.0.3.sec=A clear means of communication,

5.1.0.4.sec=An open approach for dealing with issues,

5.1.0.5.sec=An objective change control procedure,

5.1.0.6.sec=A process to recognize and manage risks,

5.1.0.7.sec=An approach for accepting project deliverables, and

5.1.0.8.sec=A definition of what constitutes project completion.

5.1.0.9.sec=This section describes the basic approaches that we will use to provide this type of control.

5.1.0.=[Z/ol/s9]

5.1.1.Ti=Agreed-Upon Baseline

5.1.1.1.sec=This Statement of Work is the foundation or baseline for all the key project management activities on the project. It identi-fies the work activities that will be tracked, defines the boundaries for scope control, identifies responsibilities, and clari-fies many of the areas where issues may arise that need to be managed.

5.1.1.2.sec=The Statement of Work is then used as the basis for creating a detailed project plan for all the work activities to be per-formed on the project. Every activity will have an estimate of work effort. All project team members, from Vendor and Client, will be assigned these activities, and this will determine the cost of the activity based on the cost of the individual team members assigned to it.

5.1.1.3.sec=Once all the activities are allocated to team members, the project plan is leveled and loaded against the calendar. This completed plan represents the baseline plan. This plan will provide the key milestone dates to track schedule progress.

5.1.1.4.sec=The summation of all activity costs from the baselined project plan, plus expenses, plus the costs of purchased items like hardware, software, and other services, will represent the budget that the Vendor/Client management team will track against.

5.1.1.=[Z/ol/s4]

5.1.2.Ti=Process to Monitor Progress

5.1.2.1.sec=The detailed project plan is the key vehicle for measuring progress. The specific activities that each team member works on, and their progress against completing those activities, are the only objective measure of where the project stands against the schedule and budget. To capture this information every team member, both Vendor and {Client}, will record and report their actual hours spent on project activities against the budgeted time in the project plan. In addition, each team member will pro-vide estimates of the effort remaining on activities that have not been completed.

5.1.2.2.sec=This information will be recorded on a weekly time sheet and given to the appropriate manager along with a status report that provides a brief description of work accomplished, issues/problems, and planned work. The management team will determine where the project stands versus the schedule and budget by analysis of this information.

5.1.2.=[Z/ol/s2]

5.1.3.Ti=Means of Communication 

5.1.3.1.sec=Because Vendor and Client are responsible for managing this project, it is important that we use a formal process to sup-port timely and accurate communication between the organizations. There are two key vehicles for providing this com-munication: a weekly status report and a weekly status meeting.

5.1.3.2.0.sec=As mentioned earlier, all team members will report progress and status weekly. This information, and the analysis of it, will be summarized into a project status report for Client and Vendor Management. This report contains the following information:

5.1.3.2.1.sec=Significant Problems/Actions Taken,

5.1.3.2.2.sec=Progress Summary,

5.1.3.2.3.sec=Accomplishments,

5.1.3.2.4.sec=Planned Accomplishments,

5.1.3.2.5.sec=Budget Status, and

5.1.3.2.6.sec=Issues Log (discussed later).

5.1.3.2.=[Z/ol/s6]

5.1.3.3.0.sec=The weekly project status meeting will be used to review the project status and open issues in the status report. The Ven-dor and Client management team must be committed to having this meeting and making it effective. The keys to making the meeting worthwhile are the following:

5.1.3.3.1.sec=Have the meetings often enough so that timely information is available;

5.1.3.3.2.sec=Focus the meeting on major issues or areas where management action or intervention is required; and 

5.1.3.3.3.sec=Make sure that the information provided is accurate and objective.

5.1.3.3.=[Z/ol/s3]

5.1.3.=[Z/ol/s3]


5.1.4.Ti=Approach for Dealing with Issues

5.1.4.0.sec=Every project has issues that hinder progress. It is important that these issues are identified and resolved quickly by the right person. The first step in effectively dealing with these issues is to make the entire team aware of the importance of identifying issues and getting proper resolution. We will then use the following procedure to track the identified issues:

5.1.4.1.Ti=Identify issues

5.1.4.1.sec=When the project begins, we will start identifying any issues that could hinder our ability to meet the objectives of the project. Issues can be identified by anyone involved with the project.

5.1.4.2.Ti=Document the issue

5.1.4.2.sec=The person who identifies the issue must document it.

5.1.4.3.Ti=Assign responsibility for resolving issues

5.1.4.3.sec=The Vendor/Client management team will determine the appropriate indi-vidual who will be responsible for resolving each issue. The responsible person must be an individual who has the knowledge and authority to make decisions regarding the issue. The management team will also assign a priority to the issue.

5.1.4.4.Ti=Monitor and control progress

5.1.4.4.sec=All issues will be tracked on an issues log that will be maintained to formally track the status and resolution of the issues.

5.1.4.5.Ti=Report progress on issue resolution

5.1.4.5.sec=As mentioned earlier, the issues log will be a part of the weekly status report and discussed in the weekly status meeting.

5.1.4.6.Ti=Communicate issue resolution

5.1.4.6.sec=The issues log and documented resolutions of issues will be made available to all team members.

5.1.4.00.sec=In the event that an issue cannot be resolved in a reasonable time-frame, to the mutual satisfaction of Vendor and Client, we will determine a mutually acceptable approach to escalating it to the next level of management.

5.1.4.=[Z/ol/6]

5.1.5.Ti=Change Control Procedure

5.1.5.1.sec=The Change Control Procedure is a crucial mechanism that can affect the success or failure of this project. This process is the primary vehicle for containing scope and giving management the opportunity to make timely trade-offs between the three key project variables of cost, time, and scope. It is important that potential changes are identified early, documented carefully, and resolved at the appropriate levels of responsibility.

5.1.5.2.0.sec=Changes are broadly defined as work activities or work products not originally planned for as defined by this Statement of Work. More specifically, changes will include the following:

5.1.5.2.1.sec=Any scope items not listed in this Statement of Work (Section 3),

5.1.5.2.2.sec=Participation in activities not previously included in this Statement of Work’s list of work activities (Section 4.2),

5.1.5.2.3.sec=Provision or development of deliverables not included in this Statement of Work (Section 4.3),

5.1.5.2.4.sec=A change in responsibilities, as defined in this Statement of Work (Sections 4, 5, or 6) between Vendor and Client, including reallocation of project staffing,

5.1.5.2.5.sec=Any rework of completed activities or accepted deliverables,

5.1.5.2.6.sec=Investigative work to determine the impact of major changes,

5.1.5.2.7.sec=Assumptions not remaining valid,

5.1.5.2.8.sec=Risks that actually occurred,

5.1.5.2.9.sec=Delays caused by schedule slippage, and

5.1.5.2.10.sec=Variances of actual work effort from estimated effort.

5.1.5.2.=[Z/ol/s10]

5.1.5.3.sec=In order to manage change properly, a Change Control Process will be established to identify, record, assess, and ap-prove changes to the project. Vendor and Client will follow this process to classify, prioritize, approve, or reject changes. Change requests need to be clearly defined, including cost and schedule implications, to allow Vendor and Client management to make appropriate decisions. Vendor will always need prior authorization and approval of expen-ditures by Client before starting work on changes.

5.1.5.4.sec=This information will be identified and tracked as part of the monitoring and reporting processes defined in Sections 5.1.2 and 5.1.3.

5.1.5.5.sec=At the beginning of the project Vendor and Client management will institute a mutually acceptable change control procedure.

5.1.5.=[Z/ol/s5]

5.1.6.Ti=Acceptance of Deliverables

5.1.6.0.sec=All of the completed deliverables identified in this SOW will be formally submitted for final review and approval. This section outlines the key components to this acceptance process. Vendor and Client at the start of the project will mutually agree to a more detailed acceptance procedure and specific acceptance criteria. The key components are:

5.1.6.1.sec=There will be only one person identified as the designated acceptor for each deliverable;

5.1.6.2.sec=The deliverables will include an acceptance form for signature;

5.1.6.3.sec=Each deliverable will have clearly documented, objective acceptance criteria;

5.1.6.4.sec=There will be a specified time-frame for acceptance/rejection of each deliverable; and

5.1.6.5.sec=Deliverables will be deemed accepted if the acceptance time-frame is exceeded.

5.1.6.00.sec=In order to avoid delays in the schedule and the associated increased cost due to slow deliverable review, deliverables not reviewed and approved within a review period of NN work days will be considered accepted. Feedback supplied after the review period will be evaluated as a change of scope.

5.1.6.=[Z/ol/s5]

5.1.7.Ti=Project Completion Criteria

5.1.7.sec=The project will be completed when all of the deliverables identified in Section 4.3 have been accepted.

5.1.=[Z/ol/7]

5.2.Ti=Project Organization

5.2.sec={Project.OrganizationalChart}

5.3.Ti=Roles and Responsibilities

5.3.0.sec=During this engagement, {Client.ProjectManager.Name.Full} will be performing the role of Client Project Manager and {Vendor.ProjectManager.Name.Full} will be performing the role of Vendor Project Manager. In order to eliminate du-plicate effort or gaps, the following table defines the separation of responsibilities:

5.3.1.1.Ti=Budgets/Funding
	
5.3.1.1.1.Ti=Authorize Funding/Budget

5.3.1.1.1.sec={Client.ProjectManager.Name.Full}

5.3.1.1.2.Ti=Adherence to Budget
	
5.3.1.1.2.sec={Client.ProjectManager.Name.Full} 

5.3.1.1.3.Ti=Track/Report Client Costs

5.3.1.1.3.sec={Client.ProjectManager.Name.Full}

5.3.1.1.4.Ti=Track/Report Vendor Costs

5.3.1.1.4.sec={Vendor.ProjectManager.Name.Full}

5.3.1.1.=[Z/ol/4]

5.3.1.2.Ti=Schedules
	
5.3.1.2.1.Ti=Planning

5.3.1.2.1.sec=Vendor PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.2.2.Ti=Planning Support

5.3.1.2.2.sec=CLIENT PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.2.3.Ti=Adherence

5.3.1.2.3.sec=CLIENT PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.2.4.Ti=Track/Report

5.3.1.2.4.sec=Vendor PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.2.=[Z/ol/4]

5.3.1.3.Ti=Issues
	
5.3.1.3.1.Ti=Identify

5.3.1.3.1.sec=Entire Project Team

5.3.1.3.2.Ti=Track/Report

5.3.1.3.2.sec=Vendor PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.3.3.Ti=Resolve Client Issues

5.3.1.3.3.sec=Client PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.3.4.Ti=Resolve Vendor Issues

5.3.1.3.4.sec=Vendor PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.3.=[Z/ol/4]

5.3.1.4.Ti=Changes of Scope
	
5.3.1.4.1.Ti=Identify

5.3.1.4.1.sec=Vendor PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.4.2.Ti=Track/Report

5.3.1.4.2.sec=Vendor PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.4.3.Ti=Approve

5.3.1.4.3.sec=Client PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.4.=[Z/ol/3]

5.3.1.5.Ti=Deliverables
	
5.3.1.5.1.Ti=Track Status

5.3.1.5.1.sec=Vendor PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.5.2.Ti=Review for Quality

5.3.1.5.2.sec=Client PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.5.3.Ti=Present for Acceptance

5.3.1.5.3.sec=Vendor PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.5.4.Ti=Approval and Sign-off

5.3.1.5.4.sec=Client PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.5.=[Z/ol/4]

5.3.1.6.Ti=Team Management
	
5.3.1.6.1.Ti=Team Structure

5.3.1.6.1.sec=Both

5.3.1.6.2.Ti=Acquiring Resources
	
5.3.1.6.2.sec=Each is responsible for its part of the team

5.3.1.6.3.Ti=Management of Third Parties

5.3.1.6.3.sec=	Client PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.6.4.Ti=Allocation of Resources

5.3.1.6.4.sec=Each is responsible for its part of the team

5.3.1.6.5.Ti=Overall Direction

5.3.1.6.5.sec=Client PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.6.6.Ti=Specific Direction to Client Team

5.3.1.6.6.sec=Client PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.6.7.Ti=Specific Direction to Vendor Team

5.3.1.6.7.sec=Vendor PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.6.=[Z/ol/7]

5.3.1.7.Ti=Methodology & Management Procedures
	
5.3.1.7.1.Ti=Development

5.3.1.7.1.sec=Vendor PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.7.2.Ti=Approval

5.3.1.7.2.sec=Client PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.7.3.Ti=Monitoring

5.3.1.7.3.sec=Vendor PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.7.4.Ti=Adherence

5.3.1.7.4.sec=Each is responsible for its part of the team

5.3.1.7.=[Z/ol/4]

5.3.1.8.Ti=Status Reports
	
5.3.1.8.1.Ti=Collect Information

5.3.1.8.1.sec=Vendor PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.8.2.Ti=Write–Draft

5.3.1.8.2.sec=Vendor PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.8.3.Ti=Review

5.3.1.8.3.sec=Client PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.8.4.Ti=Write–Final

5.3.1.8.4.sec=	Vendor PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.6.5.Ti=Distribute

5.3.1.6.5.sec=Vendor PROJECT MANAGER NAME

5.3.1.6.=[Z/ol/5]

5.3.1.=[Z/ol/6]


5.3.2.0.sec=The following table describes the roles and responsibilities of other key team members.

5.3.2.1.0.1.sec=Resource/Role

5.3.2.1.1.1.sec=________

5.3.2.1.0.2.sec=Time Required

5.3.2.1.1.2.sec=________

5.3.2.1.0.3.sec=Description

5.3.2.1.1.3.sec=________

5.3.2.1.0.4.sec=Firm

5.3.2.1.1.4.sec=________

5.3.2.1.00.Sec=</i>

5.3.2.1.=[Z/tb/c/4]

5.3.2.1.=[Z/tb/r/1]

5.3.2.=[Z/ol-none/s1]

5.3.=[Z/ol/s2]

5.=[Z/ol/3]

6.Ti=Assumptions

6.0.sec=Project Assumptions are those expectations upon which the Project “path forward” is based and which, if proven incor-rect, result in a significant Project Issue that could invalidate the Project Budget Estimates, Schedules, and Approach. Such an invalidated Project Assumption will usually result in processing of a Change Request to the Project.

6.1.Ti=General Exclusions

6.2.Ti=General Assumptions

6.3.Ti=Business Process

6.4.Ti=Organization

6.5.Ti=Location

6.6.Ti=Application

6.7.Ti=Data

6.8.Ti=Technology

6.=[Z/ol/7]

7.Ti=Fees and Expenses

7.0.sec=Vendor will conduct this project on a Time & Materials basis.

7.1.Ti=Professional Fees

7.1.1.sec=Vendor will be paid for all hours worked on the project at the rates listed in this section. There will be no maximums or minimums and no premium rate for overtime work, which is defined as hours worked by one person exceeding 40 hours in one week (Sunday through Saturday).

7.1.2.0.sec=The hourly rates that will be used for this project are:

7.1.2.=[Z/ol/s2]

7.1.=[Z/ol/s2]

7.2.Ti=Travel-Related Expenses

7.2.sec=Client will pay all reasonable travel-related expenses incurred by employees of Vendor in connection with this project. These charges will be billed at cost, plus an administrative fee of 3 percent of expenses.

7.3.Ti=Other Expenses

7.3.sec=Client will pay all reasonable and mutually agreed-upon expenses incurred by Vendor.

7.4.Ti=Payment Schedule

7.4.sec=Vendor will submit bi-weekly invoices for all services provided and for travel-related and other expenses. Invoices are due upon receipt.

7.=[Z/ol/2]

8.Ti=Appendices

=[Z/ol/8]
