Ti=YOUR VIDEO PITCH

0.sec=You are required to submit a video presentation that captures your own pitch for why your solution should be funded. You will upload a short digital film using YouTube. Set the Privacy Settings on your video to Public or Unlisted; do not set them to Private. Your video may be extracted from your submissions and made available to the public. Please appeal to a broad audience. Video submissions should follow these guidelines: 

Note=Make into a module:

1.sec=A length of 30-90 seconds (no more than 1.5 minutes).
2.sec=One person (two maximum) should present himself or herself during the video.
3.sec=Focus on providing a personal connection; it is not necessary to produce a sophisticated video.
4.sec=Your pitch must be in English.
5.0.sec=Video submissions that do not follow these guidelines may be removed from the application. Here are some logistical and technical suggestions: 
5.1.sec=Video cameras, digital cameras, phones, or laptops are easy-to-use devices for recording video.
5.2.sec=If possible, set to low resolution to reduce file size. This enables easier video uploading.

5.=[Z/ol/s2]

6.sec=If you are having difficulty uploading the video file, try logging out of the application and logging back in using another Internet browser (Google’s Chrome browser is preferred).
7.0.sec=Here are general suggestions for delivering a high-quality video pitch: 
7.1.sec=Introduce yourself and your organization and/or team.
7.2.sec=What is the problem that you are committed to solving?
7.3.sec=What is your proposed solution?
7.4.sec=What is unique about your proposed solution?
7.5.sec=How would you measure success and achieve broad but meaningful impact?
7.=[Z/ol/s5]

8.0.sec=Hone your content:
8.1.sec=Keep your description and language simple.
8.2.sec=Demonstrate passion through your words and enthusiasm.
8.3.sec=Practice numerous times before recording your video pitch.
8.4.sec=Take time to edit your video and seek feedback from others.
8.5.sec=Do not submit your video pitch if you see room for improvement.

8.=[Z/ol/s5]

9.sec=Please go to www.youtube.com and upload your video. After uploading your video, copy the YouTube Video ID into the box below and click the Update button. Your video will display below the box once you have successfully updated the YouTube Video ID. Please be sure everyone can view your application video by setting it to Public or Unlisted in the video's settings on YouTube. If you need help locating your YouTube Video ID, please watch this video. 

10.sec=YouTube Video ID: {YouTubeVideo.URL}


=[Z/ol/s10]
