Ti=Price and Payments

1.Ti=Total Charges

1.sec=Service Provider’s charges for the Services shall all be set forth in the applicable Statement of Work. The charges specified in the Statement of Work are the total charges for the Services on a particular Statement of Work, and no other fees, costs, or expenses may be charged to Customer except as set forth in the Statement of Work.

2.Ti=Time and Method of Payment

2.sec=All fees payable to Service Provider under this Agreement shall be detailed, categorized, and clearly stated on an invoice in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth in this Article 7 (Price and Payments). Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties in the applicable Statement of Work or otherwise, all amounts payable under this Agreement shall be payable in U.S. Dollars. Service Provider shall invoice Customer as set forth in this Section, and Customer shall pay all net undisputed amounts due to Service Provider under this Agreement within forty five (45) days of Customer’s receipt of Service Provider’s invoice. Service Provider shall submit invoices on a monthly basis (but not until the last day of each month during which Services and/or Deliverables were delivered), or as may be otherwise specified in this Agreement, in a form provided by Customer or as otherwise mutually agreed to by the Parties.

3.Ti=Services

3.0.sec=The rates for all Services rendered by Service Provider to Customer shall be payable as set forth in the applicable Statement of Work. Any invoice relating to fees for any Services shall detail: (a) the Services performed (e.g., each activity, task and/or Critical Path Milestone); (b) the identity of the Service Provider Personnel performing the Services; (c) the number of hours and corresponding fees attributable to each such person’s performance of the Services; and (d) such other information as reasonable requested by Customer. Unless other payment terms are specified in the applicable Statement of Work, Customer and Service Provider agree that payments to Service Provider for Services shall be invoiced as follows:

3.1.Ti=Fixed Fee Services

3.1.0.sec=All Services identified in a Statement of Work as Services to be paid at a fixed rate shall be invoiced in accordance with the payment schedule set forth in the applicable Statement of Work. If no payment schedule is set forth in the applicable Statement of Work, such Services fees shall be invoiced as follows:

3.1.1.sec=% of Services Fee	Event

3.1.2.sec=20	Execution of the Statement of Work

3.1.3.sec=60	Spread equally among no less than three (3) Critical Path Milestones

3.1.4.sec=20	Acceptance

3.1.=[Z/ol/s4]

3.2.Ti=Time-and-Materials Services

3.2.sec=All Services identified in a Statement of Work as Services to be paid on a time-and-materials basis shall be invoiced in accordance with the terms set forth in this Section. The applicable Statement of Work shall identify no less than three (3) Critical Path Milestones. Upon Service Provider’s successful completion of each Critical Path Milestone and delivery to Customer of any Deliverables corresponding to such Critical Path Milestone, Service Provider shall invoice Customer for an amount equal to seventy five percent (75%) of the fees for all Services rendered by Service Provider for completion of the applicable Critical Path Milestone. The remaining twenty five percent (25%) of such fees for each Critical Path Milestone shall be invoiced by Service Provider upon Acceptance. Service Provider shall cause its personnel to promptly record or report their hours worked performing Services under this Agreement on a weekly basis, either manually or online as may be reasonably requested by Customer.

3.3.Ti=Not to Exceed Services

3.3.sec=Under a not to exceed amount payment structure, Customer’s obligations with respect to Services performed under the applicable Statement of Work (other than to reimburse for pass-through charges, travel and other expenses in accordance with this Article 7 (Price and Payments) shall not exceed such amount (the “Not to Exceed Amount”), regardless of the amount of time and materials expended by Service Provider.

3.4.Ti=SOW Budget

3.4.sec=Each Statement of Work to be paid on a time and materials basis or based on a Not to Exceed Amount shall contain a budget for the overall Services to performed under the applicable SOW (“Budget”). If a SOW fails to identify the payment structure (i.e., time and materials, not to exceed, etc.), the Budgeted amount shall be deemed to be a fixed fee. Service Provider shall notify the Customer SOW Manager with each invoice for Services as to the Percentage of Completion and the Incurred Cost Percentage (for Time and Materials and for Not To Exceed Amounts) or the Incurred Fixed Fee Percentage (for fixed fee amounts) through the end of the period covered by the invoice. The Customer SOW Manager also shall report to the Service Provider SOW Manager the Customer SOW Manager’s estimate of the Percentage of Completion as of the end of such period. Failure to agree on the Percentage of Completion shall be treated as dispute under Article 11 (Dispute Resolution). Customer shall not pay any portion of any invoice for Services that represents an Incurred Cost Percentage or an Incurred Fixed Fee Percentage in excess of the Percentage of Completion for the period of the invoice. At any time that the Incurred Cost Percentage or the Incurred Fixed Fee Percentage exceeds the Percentage of Completion for a SOW, or at any time that the Service Provider SOW Manager or the Customer SOW Manager determines that a cost overrun in relation to the Budget is probable, the Service Provider SOW Manager shall provide a written assessment to the Customer SOW Manager as to whether the SOW can be completed by Service Provider within Budget. If the written assessment indicates that the SOW will not be completed within Budget, the Service Provider SOW Manager also shall include in such written assessment the reasons why the Budget will not be met and recommendations for how to complete the SOW within Budget (e.g., reallocating priorities, etc.). If Customer is not satisfied with the written assessment, Customer shall have the right, in its sole discretion, to: (a) revise the scope of the SOW so that the Budget will not be exceeded; (b) reforecast the Budget; (c) terminate the SOW immediately without liability or penalty; or (d) take such other action as will result in the Budget not being exceeded. Customer shall have the right to withhold any payments due to Service Provider until such written assessment has been provided to Customer.

3.=[Z/ol/4]

4.Ti=Pass-Through Charges

4.sec=Customer shall not be responsible for any pass-through charges unless Customer has agreed to such charges in a Statement of Work. Before submitting an invoice to Customer for any pass-through charges, Service Provider shall: (a) review and validate the invoiced charges; (b) identify any detectable errors or omissions; and (c) communicate with the applicable supplier to correct any errors or omissions, resolve any questions or issues, and obtain any applicable credits for Customer. Service Provider shall deliver to Customer the original supplier invoice, together with any documentation supporting such invoice and a statement that Service Provider has reviewed and validated the invoiced charges, within five (5) days after Service Provider’s receipt thereof. Service Provider shall not charge any handling or administrative charge in connection with its processing or review of such invoices. In addition, if the supplier’s invoice offers a discount for payment prior to a specified date, Service Provider shall use best efforts to deliver such invoice and associated documentation to Customer at least ten (10) days prior to such date. To the extent Service Provider fails to comply with its obligations hereunder, it shall be financially responsible for any discounts lost or any late fees or interest charges incurred by Customer. In addition, to the extent Service Provider fails to process any invoice for pass-through charges in accordance with this provision within ninety (90) days after receipt, Service Provider shall be financially responsible for the payment of all such invoiced amounts.

5.Ti=Travel Policy, Out-of-Pocket Expenses and Other Charges

5.sec=Customer shall reimburse Service Provider for all reasonable travel and out-of-pocket expenses incurred by Service Provider, provided that such expenses conform to the travel and out-of-pocket expenses policy attached hereto as Schedule 7.5 (Expense Policy) (as may be modified by Customer upon reasonable notice to Service Provider) or are otherwise pre-approved by Customer in writing. Such travel and out-of-pocket expenses shall not include Service Provider’s overhead costs (or allocations thereof), general and/or administrative expenses or other mark-ups, and shall be calculated at Service Provider’s actual incremental expense and shall be net of all rebates and allowances.

6.Ti=Disputed Amounts

6.sec=If an invoiced amount is disputed in good faith by Customer then, until resolution of the dispute occurs pursuant to Article 11 (Dispute Resolution), Customer may suspend disputed payments and toll the running of time for default by: (a) paying the undisputed amount, if any; and (b) sending a written statement of exceptions to Service Provider. All of Service Provider’s obligations shall continue unabated during the duration of the dispute resolution. Customer shall have the right to set off any undisputed amounts owed to Service Provider against any credits due Customer by Service Provider.

7.Ti=No Charge for Re-performance

7.sec=At no additional cost or expense to Customer, Service Provider will re-perform (including any required backup or restoration of data from scheduled backups or, if not available on such backups, restoration by other means with Customer’s reasonable cooperation) any Services and/or re-provide any Deliverables that result in incorrect outputs due to an error or breach by Service Provider, and the resources required for such performance or provisioning will not be counted in calculating the fees or charges payable or resources utilized by Customer hereunder.

8.Ti=Taxes.

8.1.Ti=Responsibility for Taxes

8.1.sec=Each Party will be responsible for any taxes on property it owns or leases, for any franchise or privilege tax on its business, and for any tax based on its gross or net income or gross receipts. Service Provider will be responsible for all sales, service, value-added, lease, use, personal property, excise, consumption, and other taxes and duties, including VAT, payable by Service Provider on any goods or services used or consumed by Service Provider in providing the Services and/or Deliverables (including services obtained from Service Provider subcontractors and/or Service Provider Affiliates). Service Provider will be responsible for all Service Taxes. If required under applicable Laws, Service Provider will invoice Customer for the full amount of such Service Taxes, as separately stated items, and then credit or reimburse Customer for that portion of such Service Taxes for which Service Provider is financially responsible under this Agreement.

8.2.Ti=Minimizing Taxes; Liability for Taxes

8.2.sec=The Parties will cooperate to more accurately determine and minimize their respective tax liability. Each Party will provide tax information or tax documents reasonably requested by the other Party. Each Party will promptly notify the other of any claim for taxes asserted with respect to this Agreement or a Statement of Work by a taxing authority with jurisdiction over either Party. With respect to any claim arising out of a tax form or return signed by a Party to this Agreement, the signing Party may control the response to and settlement of the claim, but the other Party shall have the right to participate to the extent it may be liable.

8.=[Z/ol/2]

9.Ti=Set Off

9.sec=Customer may set off against any and all amounts otherwise payable to Service Provider pursuant to any of the provisions of this Agreement any and all amounts owed by Service Provider to Customer under the provisions of this Agreement or any other agreements between the Parties including Service Level credits. Within thirty (30) days following any such set off, Customer shall provide to Service Provider a written accounting of such set off and a written statement of the reasons therefor.

=[Z/ol/9]

