Ti=C. WHAT’S THE PROBLEM & HOW WILL YOU SOLVE IT?

1.Ti=THE PROBLEM STATEMENT (250 words)

1.0.sec=Please provide a broad description of the specific problem that your team is committed to solving. Identify who or what is impacted by this problem. Offer an explanation of the current resources that are available to address the problem. Focus on why those resources are insufficient to support meaningful progress toward one or more aspects of a solution. Explain any previous attempts to solve the problem, if there were any, and/or why the problem persists within the current environment. Later, you will be asked to explain in detail your proposed solution; here, focus on defining the problem and setting the stage for your proposed solution

1.=[Z/ol/s1]

2.Ti=YOUR SOLUTION (250 words)

2.0.sec=Describe your proposed solution in general terms, using layman’s language, and explain how it will make meaningful progress toward a solution to the problem you’ve identified. What will be the direct benefits (outcomes) of this proposed solution? Who are the direct beneficiaries? Explain how and for how long these benefits will be sustained once the solution has been implemented. Why have you chosen this particular solution, and what is the best argument for this approach, as compared to potential alternatives? Focus here on the broad goals that you seek to achieve. Describe any tactical or operational plans that you will employ in answering the next two questions.

2.=[Z/ol/s1]

3.Ti=YOUR TACTICS AND TECHNOLOGY (200 words)

3.0.sec=You have explained generally WHAT your team is offering; now, offer specific details of your proposed solution, describing your technical approach and/or related technology. Explain exactly HOW you will implement the proposed solution and the circumstances under which you will you achieve optimal results.<br>If your plan or proposed solution involves the creation or use of any technology or other products, ideas, or processes on which copyright will be asserted or patents claimed, or if your proposed solution relies on existing specific technology, products, ideas, or processes on which there are existing claims of copyright or patent rights, please review the Intellectual Property Policy, which describes the treatment of Grant Work Product (as defined therein) funded by the MacArthur Foundation.

3.=[Z/ol/s1]


4.Ti=YOUR TIMELINE AND KEY MILESTONES (250 words)

4.0.sec=In chronological order, identify key milestones in the implementation process and the timing of when they will be reached. Your proposed solution must be implemented over a period of between three and six years.

4.=[Z/ol/s1]

=[Z/ol/4]
