Note=Provisions regarding "severance."  This is another very "lawyerly" matter.  The concern is that some provision or part of a provision may be found to be invalid.  It may require something that, in the circumstances, is illegal.  As a general practice, when writing agreements, lawyers will seek to preserve the remainder of the deal even if a provision is knocked out because of illegality.  Of course, this is not always the right result, and it is also common (though less so) to see Severance provisions that attempt to describe the kind of circumstances where the entire agreement should be terminated or annulled because a provision has been declared illegal.  The other major issue is whose opinion about "illegality" counts.  In general, we say that there must have been a decision by a competent tribunal.  In the ABA MSPA version, this is expressed as being a decision by a competent court.  ("Competent" meaning a court that properly has jurisdiction.)  Of course, if arbitration is the selected method of decision-making, the decision of the arbitrator should (also) count.


F.=[F/US/00/Agt/Sec/Misc/Sever/0.md]

ABA.MSPA.=[F/US/00/Agt/Acquire/Shares/MSPA/SPA/Misc/Sever/0.md]  from ABA's Model Stock Purchase Agreement

ABA.MSA.=[F/US/00/Agt/Service/MSA/ABA/Sec/Misc/Sever/0.md] from Ward Classen's ABA book on technology agreements

CooleyGo.=[F/US/00/Agt/NDA/Sec/General/Misc/Sever/0.md]  from CooleyGo.com (US)

Techstars.Sec=No Severance provision in Techstars form.

NVCA.IRA.=[F/US/00/Agt/Startup/NVCA/IRA/Sec/Misc/Sever/0.md] National Venture Capital Association - Investors' Rights Agreement (Amendment and Waiver)

NVCA.Indemnification.=[F/US/00/Agt/Startup/NVCA/Indemnification/Sec/Misc/Sever/0.md] National Venture Capital Association - Indemnification Agreement

NVCA.SPA.=[F/US/00/Agt/Startup/NVCA/SPA/Sec/Misc/Sever/0.md]

NVCA.ROFR.=[F/US/00/Agt/Startup/NVCA/ROFR/Sec/Misc/Sever/0.md] National Venture Capital Association - Right of First Refusal

YC.SAFE.=[F/US/00/Agt/Startup/YCombinator/SAFE/Sec/Misc/Sever/0.md]  Y Combinator "SAFE" investment note.

Model.Root=Mouse over to see the name of the source of each:<br><b>Recommended format:</b><br>{F.Sec}<br>Alternatives:<ol><li>{ABA.MSPA.Sec}<li>{ABA.MSA.Sec}<li>{CooleyGo.Sec}<li>{Techstars.Sec}<li>{NVCA.Sec}<li>{YC.SAFE.Sec}</ol>

NVCA.Sec=<b>NVCA Variations</b><ol><li>{NVCA.COI.Sec}<li>{NVCA.IRA.Sec}<li>{NVCA.Indemnification.Sec}<li>{NVCA.ROFR.Sec}<li>{NVCA.SPA.Sec}</ol>