Ti=E. WHAT’S THE EVIDENCE THAT YOU CAN DO IT?

1.Ti=YOUR PREVIOUS PERFORMANCE (250 words)

1.0.sec=Now that you have established the potential effectiveness of your proposed solution, please explain how your team is uniquely positioned to deliver results based on your track record. On what basis of your team’s experience and previous performance should any claims be warranted? Judges are looking for indicators that you have the capacity for executing your plan. Emphasize your knowledge of the core disciplines, practices, and technology required to succeed.

1.=[Z/ol/s1]

2.Ti=YOUR ORGANIZATIONAL CAPACITY (200 words)

2.0.sec=Please describe your organization’s current capacity to undertake the proposed solution. What are the gaps in knowledge or expertise, if any, that you need to address? Do you anticipate changes in personnel, facilities, or organization? What are the strategic relationships, if any, required to bring about the intended results?<br>Explain any infrastructure, systems, or previously measured successes that have been put into place and/or tested to illustrate that you have the capacity to meet your standards of measured results. Your previous performance is a theme that may be represented in other responses. Here, focus on your team’s capacity to repeat, measure, and/or scale any claims made as Evidence of Effectiveness.

2.=[Z/ol/s1]


3.Ti=FINANCIAL RECORDS

3.0.sec=We require information necessary for our judges to understand your financial health and sustainability.<br>Please provide audited financial reports from the past three years for the principal organization. If your organization does not have them or cannot provide them, please upload a letter from the most senior executive at the principal organization, explaining your inability to provide them.

3.=[Z/ol/s1]

=[Z/ol/3]

