Ti=EXHIBITS

SOW.Ti=Statement of Work

Note=OPTIONAL

SOW.0.sec=Examples of things to include in this section

SOW.1.sec=Bulk provisioning of user accounts

SOW.2.sec=Customer training (on site or via webinar)

SOW.3.sec=Providing documentation

SOW.4.sec=Custom development work (one-time)

SOW.=[Z/ol/s4]
 
EXHIBIT B

SLA.Ti=Service Level Terms

Note=OPTIONAL: the language below is an example of a very simple short-form SLA.  These terms can range from one paragraph to several pages depending on the industry, the nature of the solution and the customer profile.

SLA.sec={_Services} shall be available 99.9%, measured monthly, excluding holidays and weekends and scheduled maintenance.  If {_Customer} requests maintenance during these hours, any uptime or downtime calculation will exclude periods affected by such maintenance.  Further, any downtime resulting from outages of third party connections or utilities or other reasons beyond {_Company}'s control will also be excluded from any such calculation. {_Customer}'s sole and exclusive remedy, and {_Company}'s entire liability, in connection with {_Service} availability shall be that for each period of downtime lasting longer than {Downtime.Period}, {_Company} will credit {_Customer} 5% of {_Service} fees for each period of 30 or more consecutive minutes of downtime; provided that no more than one such credit will accrue per day.  Downtime shall begin to accrue as soon as {_Customer} (with notice to {_Company}) recognizes that downtime is taking place, and continues until the availability of {_Services} is restored.  In order to receive downtime credit, {_Customer} must notify {_Company} in writing within 24 hours from the time of downtime, and failure to provide such notice will forfeit the right to receive downtime credit.  Such credits may not be redeemed for cash and shall not be cumulative beyond a total of credits for one (1) week of Service Fees in any one (1) calendar month in any event.  {_Company} will only apply a credit to the month in which the incident occurred.  {_Company}'s blocking of data communications or other {_Service} in accordance with its policies shall not be deemed to be a failure of {_Company} to provide adequate service levels under {_this_Agreement}.

SLA.=[Z/ol/1] 

EXHIBIT C

Support.Ti=Support Terms

Note=OPTIONAL

Support.1.sec={_Company} will provide Technical Support to {_Customer} via both telephone and electronic mail on weekdays during the hours of 9:00 am through 5:00 pm Pacific time, with the exclusion of Federal Holidays ("Support Hours").
 
Support.2.sec={_Customer} may initiate a helpdesk ticket during Support Hours by calling {HelpDesk.Phone.#} or any time by emailing [support@company.com].

Support.3.sec={_Company} will use commercially reasonable efforts to respond to all Helpdesk tickets within one (1) business day.

Support.=[Z/ol/s3]
  
Customer_Data=<font color="green">Customer Data</font>
  
=[Z/ol/Base]

sec=<center><b>EXHIBIT A</b></center><br>{SOW.Sec}<hr><center><b>EXHIBIT B</b></center><br>{SLA.Sec}<hr><center><b>EXHIBIT C</b></center><br>{Support.Sec}
