Ti=PART II: Certificate of Consent

0.sec=I have read the foregoing information, or it has been read to me. I have had the opportunity to ask questions about it and any questions that I have asked have been answered to my satisfaction.  I consent voluntarily to participate as a participant in this research.

1.1.sec=Print Name of Participant {P1.Name.Full}

1.2.sec=Signature of Participant  {P1.xSignature}

1.3.sec=Date  P1.Sign.YMD}<br>Day/month/year		 
				
1.=[Z/ol-none/s3]

2.0.sec=I have witnessed the accurate reading of the consent form to the potential participant, and the individual has had the opportunity to ask questions. I confirm that the individual has given consent freely. 

2.1.sec=Print name of witness {P6.Name.Full}          AND      {P1.Thumbprint.Field}   Thumb print of participant

2.2.sec=Signature of witness  {P6.xSignature}

2.3.sec=Date {P6.Sign.YMD}<br>Day/month/year
	
2.=[Z/ol-none/s3]

3.0.sec=Statement by the researcher/person taking consent

3.1.0.sec=I  have accurately read out the information sheet to the potential participant, and to the best of my ability made sure that the participant understands that the following will be done:

3.1.1.sec=____________________________

3.1.2.sec=____________________________

3.1.3.sec=____________________________

3.1.=[Z/ol/s3]

3.2.sec=I confirm that the participant was given an opportunity to ask questions about the study, and all the questions asked by the participant have been answered correctly and to the best of my ability. I confirm that the individual has not been coerced into giving consent, and the consent has been given freely and voluntarily. 
  
3.3.sec=A copy of this ICF has been provided to the participant.

3.4.sec=Print Name of Researcher/person taking the consent: {P7.Name.Full}			

3.5.sec=Signature of Researcher /person taking the consent {P7.xSignature}

3.6.sec=Date {P7.Sign.YMD}<br>

3.=[Z/ol-none/s6]

=[Z/paras/s3]