
Ti=H. MACARTHUR FOUNDATION POLICIES

0.sec=Can you achieve your objectives consistent with the MacArthur Foundation’s policies and applicable law governing the MacArthur Foundation? The following sections of the application are for internal review and will not be made available to the Judges. Your responses to these questions may be reviewed in order to determine if your organization qualifies, based on whether you can satisfy the policies and standards of the MacArthur Foundation and the law applicable to it.

1.Ti=CHARITABLE PURPOSE (200 words)

1.0.sec=What is the charitable purpose of your solution? Describe how the public or a subset, which is a charitable class, will benefit from your solution. A charitable class must generally be an indefinite number of individuals who are the subject of the charitable purpose and not a limited number of specified individuals. For example, the class can be needy persons within a disadvantaged community but not a specified person in the community, even if the person is disadvantaged. There can be a comparatively small number of individuals, if the individuals are not identified and the class is open ended. 

1.=[Z/ol/s1]

2.Ti=PRIVATE BENEFIT (200 words)

2.0.secWill private interests (such as shareholders, for-profit companies, contractors, consultants, or other individuals) benefit more than incidentally from the solution as compared to the public or charitable benefit? If your solution will trigger any private benefit to one or more individuals, provide an explanation of how the public benefit cannot be achieved without necessarily benefiting those individuals and to what degree any private benefit compares to public benefit. You may refer to our Private Benefit Policy for clarification.

2.=[Z/ol/s1]


3.Ti=LOBBYING ACTIVITIES (150 words)

3.0.sec=Does your proposed solution involve any efforts to effect policy changes through changes in existing legislation, or the enactment of new legislation, and require lobbying activities with respect to a specific legislative proposal?

3.=[Z/ol/s1]


4.Ti=HUMAN SUBJECTS RESEARCH (200 words)

4.0.Ti=Does your proposed solution require any research that would involve human subjects?

4.=[Z/ol/s1]


5.Ti=TEAM STORY (150 words)

5.0.sec=Lastly, we want to understand your motives for participating in this Competition. Tell us how your team came to work on this problem and arrived at this solution.

5.=[Z/ol/s1]


6.Ti=ADDITIONAL INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED

6.0.sec=If your organization or collaboration is named as a Semifinalist, you will be required to provide additional information during the next stage of the Competition (please refer to the Rules and the Timeline), including but not limited to:

6.1.sec=Tax Determination Letter, if applicable

6.2.sec=Articles of Incorporation, Charter, or similar documentation

6.3.sec=An organizational chart showing the roles and responsibilities of the key persons associated with the project

6.4.sec=Biographies of project’s key staff, detailing their relevant experience to the proposed project

6.5.sec=Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning Plan for the proposed solution (refer to the Guidance for Monitoring, Evaluation, and Learning)

6.6.sec=Existing policies, if any, addressing conflicts of interest, whistleblower, internal controls, anti-money laundering, intellectual property, human subjects research, code of conduct, ethics, gifts, and any similar policies governing the organization

6.7.sec=If you are not a public charity, a statement that any MacArthur Foundation grant funds will not be used for lobbying purposes, or if you are a public charity under the Internal Revenue Code, a lobbying budget in which you specify the amount of lobbying expenses and non-lobbying expenses
 
6.=[Z/ol/s7]

=[Z/ol/6]
