Ti=Service Levels.

1.Ti=Service Level Commitment and Reporting

1.sec=Service Provider commits to provide the Services in accordance with the Services Levels as set forth in the applicable Statement of Work. Service Provider shall provide monthly reports to Customer regarding its performance relative to the Service Levels. If Service Provider fails to meet a Service Level in a month, Service Provider shall: (a) report that failure to Customer; (b) promptly investigate the causes of the problem; (c) prepare a report identifying the causes and the methods to be used by Service Provider to correct the problem and prevent a recurrence; (d) take commercially reasonable actions necessary to correct the problem and begin meeting the Service Levels as soon as practicable; (e) advise Customer of the status of the remedial efforts being undertaken with respect to such problem; and (f) if requested by Customer due to the nature of the problem or its recurrence, make available for meetings and consultation with Customer those personnel within Service Provider who are the recognized experts with respect to the problem. Service Provider shall utilize the necessary measurement and monitoring tools and procedures to measure and report Service Provider’s performance of the Services against the applicable Service Levels to Customer on a monthly basis. Such measurement and monitoring shall permit reporting at a level of detail sufficient to verify compliance with the Service Levels, and shall be subject to audit by Customer in accordance with Section 9.5 (Audits) of this Agreement.

2.Ti=Service Level Credits

2.sec=Service Provider recognizes that its failure to meet the Service Levels may have a material adverse impact on the business and operations of Customer and that the damage from Service Provider’s failure to meet a Service Level cannot be precisely determined. Accordingly, in the event that Service Provider fails to meet a Service Level, then, in addition to any non-monetary remedies available to Customer under this Agreement, in equity or at law, Customer shall recover, the corresponding “Service Level Credit” specified in the applicable Statement of Work as liquidated damages and not a penalty. Service Provider shall not be required to pay Service Level credits to the extent that failure to meet Service Levels is caused solely: (a) by the actions of Customer; or (b) circumstances that constitute a Service Provider Force Majeure Event.

=[Z/ol/2]
