Code	Display	Definition

PurposeOfUse	purpose of use	Reason for performing one or more operations on information, which may be permitted by source system's security policy in accordance with one or more privacy policies and consent directives. Usage Notes: The rationale or purpose for an act relating to the management of personal health information, such as collecting personal health information for research or public health purposes.


HMARKT.Display=healthcare marketing

HMARKT.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information for marketing services and products related to health care.

HOPERAT.Display=healthcare operations

HOPERAT.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information used for conducting administrative and contractual activities related to the provision of health care.

DONAT.Display=donation

DONAT.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information used for cadaveric organ, eye or tissue donation.

FRAUD.Display=fraud

FRAUD.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information used for fraud detection and prevention processes.

GOV.Display=government

GOV.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information used within government processes.

HACCRED.Display=health accreditation

HACCRED.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information for conducting activities related to meeting accreditation criteria.

HCOMPL.Display=health compliance

HCOMPL.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information used for conducting activities required to meet a mandate.

HDECD.Display=decedent

HDECD.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information used for handling deceased patient matters.

HDIRECT.Display=directory

HDIRECT.Definition=To perform one or more operation operations on information used to manage a patient directory. Examples: facility enterprise payer health information exchange patient directory

HLEGAL.Display=legal

HLEGAL.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information for conducting activities required by legal proceeding.

HOUTCOMS.Display=health outcome measure

HOUTCOMS.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information used for assessing results and comparative effectiveness achieved by health care practices and interventions.

HPRGRP.Display=health program reporting

HPRGRP.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information used for conducting activities to meet program accounting requirements.

HQUALIMP.Display=health quality improvement

HQUALIMP.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information used for conducting administrative activities to improve health care quality.

HSYSADMIN.Display=health system administration

HSYSADMIN.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information to administer the electronic systems used for the delivery of health care.

MEMADMIN.Display=member administration

MEMADMIN.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information to administer health care coverage to an enrollee under a policy or program.

PATADMIN.Display=patient administration

PATADMIN.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information used for operational activities conducted to administer the delivery of health care to a patient.

PATSFTY.Display=patient safety

PATSFTY.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information in processes related to ensuring the safety of health care.

PERFMSR.Display=performance measure

PERFMSR.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information used for monitoring performance of recommended health care practices and interventions.

RECORDMGT.Display=records management

RECORDMGT.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information used within the health records management process.

TRAIN.Display=training

TRAIN.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information used in training and education.

HPAYMT.Display=healthcare payment

HPAYMT.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information for conducting financial or contractual activities related to payment for provision of health care.

CLMATTCH.Display=claim attachment

CLMATTCH.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information for provision of additional clinical evidence in support of a request for coverage or payment for health services.

COVAUTH.Display=coverage authorization

COVAUTH.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information for conducting prior authorization or predetermination of coverage for services.

COVERAGE.Display=coverage under policy or program

COVERAGE.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information for conducting activities related to coverage under a program or policy.

ELIGDTRM.Display=eligibility determination

ELIGDTRM.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information used for conducting eligibility determination for coverage in a program or policy. May entail review of financial status or disability assessment.

ELIGVER.Display=eligibility verification

ELIGVER.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information used for conducting eligibility verification of coverage in a program or policy. May entail provider contacting coverage source (e.g., government health program such as workers compensation or health plan) for confirmation of enrollment, eligibility for specific services, and any applicable copays.

ENROLLM.Display=enrollment

ENROLLM.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information used for enrolling a covered party in a program or policy. May entail recording of covered party's and any dependent's demographic information and benefit choices.

REMITADV.Display=remittance advice

REMITADV.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information about the amount remitted for a health care claim.

HRESCH.Display=healthcare research

HRESCH.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information for conducting scientific investigations to obtain health care knowledge.

CLINTRCH.Display=clinical trial research

CLINTRCH.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information for conducting scientific investigations in accordance with clinical trial protocols to obtain health care knowledge.

PATRQT.Display=patient requested

PATRQT.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information in response to a patient's request.

FAMRQT.Display=family requested

FAMRQT.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information in response to a request by a family member authorized by the patient.

PWATRNY.Display=power of attorney

PWATRNY.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information in response to a request by a person appointed as the patient's legal representative.

SUPNWK.Display=support network

SUPNWK.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information in response to a request by a person authorized by the patient.

PUBHLTH.Display=public health

PUBHLTH.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information for conducting public health activities, such as the reporting of notifiable conditions.

DISASTER.Display=disaster

DISASTER.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information used for provision of immediately needed health care to a population of living subjects located in a disaster zone.

THREAT.Display=threat

THREAT.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information used to prevent injury or disease to living subjects who may be the target of violence.

TREAT.Display=treatment

TREAT.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information for provision of health care.

CAREMGT.Display=Care Management

CAREMGT.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information for provision of health care coordination.

CLINTRL.Display=clinical trial

CLINTRL.Definition=To perform health care as part of the clinical trial protocol.

ETREAT.Display=Emergency Treatment

ETREAT.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information for provision of immediately needed health care for an emergent condition.

POPHLTH.Display=population health

POPHLTH.Definition=To perform one or more operations on information for provision of health care to a population of living subjects, e.g., needle exchange program.
